Lung cancer is one of the most critical
respiratory conditions you'll encounter as a
respiratory therapist, not just because of
its severity,
but because of how often it presents late
and affects both ventilation and oxygenation.
At its core, lung cancer is uncontrolled
cell growth in
lung tissue that disrupts normal gas
exchange.
As tumors grow, they can obstruct airways,
compress surrounding structures, and
create ventilation-perfusion mismatch.
This leads to hypoxemia, increased work of
breathing,
and, in advanced cases, respiratory
failure.
There are two main categories to know,
non-small cell
lung cancer, which is more common and
typically slower growing,
and small cell lung cancer, which is more
aggressive and
spreads rapidly.
For board exams and clinical practice,
always connect the type
of cancer to how quickly symptoms progress
and how urgently intervention is needed.
From an RT perspective, think in terms of
cause,
effect, and intervention.
Tumor growth causes airway obstruction or
alveolar damage.
That leads to symptoms like dyspnea,
cough,
hemoptysis, and decreased breath sounds.
Your role is to assess how much this is
affecting ventilation and oxygenation and
respond appropriately.
Diagnostics are key.
Imaging like chest ABGs and oxygen
saturation tell you how well the patient is
oxygenating and ventilating.
Always interpret these together, not in
isolation.
Management depends on stage and severity.
Early stage disease may be treated with
surgery.
More advanced disease often requires
chemotherapy, radiation,
or targeted therapy.
But regardless of treatment, RTs play a
major role in
supportive care, oxygen therapy, airway
clearance,
bronchodilators when indicated, and
monitoring for complications.
Red flags you must recognize include
hemoptysis, rapid worsening dyspnea,
hypoxemia that doesn't respond to oxygen,
and signs of airway
obstruction or collapse.
These require immediate escalation.
In real clinical scenarios, your decisions
matter.
You're not just treating symptoms.
You're identifying deterioration early,
supporting gas exchange,
and helping guide the next step in care.
If you remember one thing, lung cancer is
not just
a tumor.
It's a progressive disruption of
ventilation and oxygenation.
Your job is to recognize that disruption,
quantify it,
and act quickly to support the patient.